>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, MARCH 25:
ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF THE
FAILED REPUBLICAN HEALTHCARE
BILL; THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION
TURNS ITS ATTENTION TO TAX
REFORM; AND IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, FAMINE AND FEARS OF
GENOCIDE AS SOUTH SUDAN'S
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS WORSENS.
>> ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS HAVE
BEEN A HALLMARK OF THIS
CONFLICT.
AND WITH ETHNIC STRIFE ON THE
RISE, THERE'S SIMPLY NO
CONFIDENCE THAT IT'S SAFE TO GO
OUTSIDE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION TRIED
TODAY TO REGAIN ITS FOOTING
FOLLOWING YESTERDAY'S KNOCK-DOWN
BLOW ON CAPITOL HILL.
FACING CERTAIN DEFEAT, HOUSE
REPUBLICANS ABRUPTLY WITHDREW
THEIR BILL TO REPLACE PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S AFFORDABLE CARE ACT JUST
BEFORE IT CAME TO A VOTE.
EMBATTLED HOUSE SPEAKER PAUL
RYAN SAID, "WE'RE GOING TO BE
LIVING WITH OBAMACARE FOR THE
FORESEEABLE FUTURE."
IN A TWEET THIS MORNING,
PRESIDENT TRUMP VOWED TO REVISIT
THE ISSUE, SAYING, "OBAMACARE
WILL EXPLODE, AND WE WILL ALL
GET TOGETHER AND PIECE TOGETHER
A GREAT HEALTHCARE PLAN FOR THE
PEOPLE.
DO NOT WORRY!"
AND VICE PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE,
TALKING TO SMALL-BUSINESS OWNERS
IN WEST VIRGINIA, ALSO PROMISED
THE FIGHT TO REPLACE OBAMACARE
WILL GO ON.
>> YESTERDAY WASN'T A VICTORY
FOR THE AMERICAN PEOPLE; IT WAS
A VICTORY FOR THE STATUS QUO IN
WASHINGTON, D.C.
AND IT WAS A VICTORY FOR THE
DISASTER OF OBAMACARE.
BUT I PROMISE YOU, THAT VICTORY
WON'T LAST VERY LONG.
( APPLAUSE )
>> Sreenivasan: MANY OF THE
NATION'S GOVERNORS WHO FEARED
RISING COSTS UNDER THE HOUSE
BILL WEREN'T SHY ABOUT
EXPRESSING THEIR VIEWS.
OHIO REPUBLICAN JOHN KASICH
TWEETED: "NOW WE HAVE A CHANCE
TO DO IT RIGHT."
BUT CALIFORNIA DEMOCRAT JERRY
BROWN WARNED IN A TWEET: "WE
MUST GIRD OURSELVES FOR THE
BATTLES YET TO COME."
TRAVELING IN BRUSSELS,
REPUBLICAN SENATOR JOHN McCAIN
SAID, "DOING NOTHING IS NOT THE
ANSWER AFTER THIS SETBACK."
>> OBAMACARE IS IMPLODING, SO WE
NEED TO CONTINUE OUR EFFORT TO
MAKE SURE THAT ALL AMERICANS
HAVE ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE
HEALTHCARE, WHICH IS NOT THE
CASE TODAY.
>> Sreenivasan: VERMONT SENATOR
AND FORMER DEMOCRATIC
PRESIDENTIAL HOPEFUL BERNIE
SANDERS COULDN'T HIDE HIS
SATISFACTION THAT THE BILL HAD
FAILED.
HE TWEETED: "OUR VICTORY IN
DEFEATING THE DISASTROUS TRUMP-
RYAN HEALTH CARE PLAN IS THE
RESULT OF MILLIONS OF AMERICANS
STANDING UP AND FIGHTING BACK."
CHASTENED REPUBLICAN LEADERS SAY
THEY PLAN TO GET RIGHT BACK AT
IT WITH THE NEXT ITEM ON MR.
TRUMP'S AGENDA.
HOUSE WAYS AND MEANS CHAIRMAN
KEVIN BRADY OF TEXAS SAID IN A
STATEMENT: "FULL SPEED AHEAD
WITH PRESIDENT TRUMP ON THE
FIRST PRO-GROWTH TAX REFORM IN A
GENERATION."
JOINING US NOW TO DISCUSS THE
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION AS IT TRIES TO
MOVE FORWARD IS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JEFF
GREENFIELD.
SO, IT WAS NOT A GOOD DAY.
PAUL RYAN AGREED ABOUT THAT AND
PRESIDENT TRUMP SORT OF DID.
WHO WAS HURT WORSE?
>> FIRST OF ALL, ANY TIME THE
TRUMP-FRIENDLY "DRUDGE REPORT"
PUTS THE HINDENBURG EXPLOSION ON
THE FRONT PAGE, IT'S KIND OF A
CLUE THINGS DIDN'T GO WELL.
I THINK THE INITIAL FALLOUT IS
GOING TO HIT THE CONGRESS AND
THE SPEAKER BECAUSE A LOT OF
WHAT HE DID WAS JUST
MYSTIFYING.
A LOT OF THE POLICY IN THE
HEALTH CARE REPEAL WAS IN DIRECT
CONTRADICTION TO WHAT THE
PRESIDENT SAID IN TERMS OF
INSURANCE FOR EVERYBODY.
AND THEN THE ENDLESS AND
UNSUCCESSFUL ATTEMPT TO FEED THE
FREEDOM CAUCUS, THE MOST
CONSERVATIVE HARD-RIGHT GROUP IN
THE CONGRESS, NOT ONLY DIDN'T
WORK, BUT IT THEN ALIENATED TWO
DOZEN MODERATES.
SO WHETHER THIS MEANS THAT THE
PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN SUSPICIOUS
OF RYAN, THE BREITBART FOLKS,
ARE GOING TO SUGGEST HIS
SPEAKERSHIP IS ENDANGERED.
I DON'T THINK WE KNOW THAT YET,
BUT I THINK THAT HE TOOK A REAL
HIT THIS WEEK.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
WHITE HOUSE?
>> WELL, OF COURSE, IF YOU
LISTEN TO TRUMP, YOU KNOW,
EVERYTHING WORKED OUT FINE, BUT
THAT'S DONALD TRUMP.
HERE'S WHAT I THINK IS AT STAKE
HERE: THE WHOLE ARGUMENT HE
MADE-- "I AM THE OUTSIDER, I AM
THE DEAL CUTTER, I KNOW HOW TO
GET THINGS DONE AND CUT THROUGH
THE MORASS OF WASHINGTON"--
HAS CLEARLY TAKEN A HIT.
I THINK THE SECOND THING,
ALTHOUGH WHY THIS SHOULD HAVE
BEEN A SURPRISE TO ANYBODY, IS
DONALD TRUMP-- LET ME BE BLUNT
ABOUT THIS-- SIMPLY DOESN'T CARE
ABOUT THE POLICY IMPLICATIONS.
IT'S ABOUT WINNING.
IT'S ABOUT BEATING HIS ENEMIES.
IT'S ABOUT LOOKING SUCCESSFUL.
SO FOR THE REPUBLICANS WHO ARE
NOW SAYING, "ALL RIGHT, WE'LL DO
TAX CUTS, WE'LL DO
INFRASTRUCTURE," HOW ARE THEY
GOING TO DEAL WITH A PRESIDENT
WHO REALLY ISN'T INTERESTED IN
THE DETAILS OF THINGS LIKE TAX
CUTS AND HOW WE GET
INFRASTRUCTURE?
>> Sreenivasan: YOU'VE WATCHED
A FEW PRESIDENTS NOW COMING
OUT OF THE BLOCKS, ALL OF THEM
HAVE SOME SPEED BUMPS.
BUT COMPARE THIS RASH IN THE
LAST 60 DAYS TO PREVIOUS
PRESIDENTS.
>> YOU'RE QUITE RIGHT.
BILL CLINTON HAD THE ATTEMPT TO
END THE BAN ON GAYS IN THE
MILITARY.
JOHN KENNEDY HAD THE BAY OF PIGS
IN APRIL OF 1961, WHICH REALLY
CAUSED HIM TO TAKE A VERY
SERIOUS RETHINKING OF HIS
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE C.I.A.
THE SPATE OF THEM, YOU KNOW, THE
TRAVEL BAN, THE SECOND TRAVEL
BAN THAT'S IN TROUBLE WITH THE
COURTS, THE HIRING AND FIRING OF
NATIONAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATOR
MICHAEL FLYNN, THE
STILL-UNANSWERED QUESTIONS ABOUT
RUSSIA.
AND I THINK THIS ONE GOES TO THE
HEART OF WHAT PEOPLE THOUGHT WAS
GOING TO HAPPEN, YOU KNOW.
RIGHT OUT OF THE BLOCKS, HE
SAID-- HE NOW SAYS HE NEVER
INTENDED TO... NEVER PROMISED
REPEAL OF OBAMACARE QUICKLY.
YEAR, HE DID.
AND SO WHAT THE PRESIDENT IS NOW
FACING IS A CHALLENGE TO THE
VERY PREMISE OF HIS ELECTION, AS
I SAID EARLIER, "I CAN GET
THINGS DONE."
AND WHEN YOU REALIZE THE HEALTH
CARE REPEAL WAS THE PRECURSOR TO
THINGS LIKE THE TAX CUT PLAN,
HOW ARE THEY GOING TO DO THAT IN
THE ABSENCE OF REPEAL?
YEAH, HE IS NOW FACING NOT TO
MENTION THE APPROVAL RATINGS--
WHICH ARE DISMAL, HISTORICALLY
DISMAL-- HE'S FACING A VERY
TOUGH ROAD.
JUST ONE QUICK THING, THOUGH.
WE JOURNALISTS ARE OLYMPIC
CHAMPIONS IN THE JUMPING TO
CONCLUSIONS EVENT.
IF THIS WERE SEPTEMBER OF '18,
THE REPUBLICANS WOULD BE FACING
A DISASTER.
WE HAVE A YEAR AND A HALF TO GO.
AFTER WHAT WE LIVED THROUGH THE
LAST YEAR AND A HALF, YOU WANT
TO TELL ME WE KNOW WHAT'S
COMING?
>> Sreenivasan: WE DON'T.
ALL RIGHT, JEFF GREENFIELD,
THANKS SO MUCH.
YESTERDAY AFTERNOON, SOON AFTER
THE REPUBLICAN HEALTHCARE BILL
WAS PULLED BEFORE ANY VOTE TOOK
PLACE, PRESIDENT TRUMP INDICATED
THAT THE FOCUS WILL NOW SHIFT TO
REFORMING THE TAX CODE.
TREASURY SECRETARY STEVEN
MNUCHIN ECHOED THAT SENTIMENT AT
AN EVENT EARLIER IN THE DAY,
SAYING HE WOULD PUSH FOR
COMPREHENSIVE TAX REFORM FOR
INDIVIDUALS AND CORPORATIONS
BEFORE THE CONGRESSIONAL RECESS
IN AUGUST.
MNUCHIN SAID THAT THE PRESIDENT
WANTS A TAX CUT FOR THE MIDDLE
CLASS, NOT THE TOP 1%.
JUST HOW THAT PROCESS WILL BEGIN
AND HOW COMPLICATED IT WILL
BECOME ARE OPEN QUESTIONS.
JOINING US FROM WASHINGTON,
D.C., TO DISCUSS WHAT LIES AHEAD
FOR TAX REFORM IS NICK TIMIRAOS
OF THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL."
SO, SECRETARY MNUCHIN SAYS IT
IS EASIER TO REFORM HEALTH CARE
THAN THE TAX CODE?
>> YEAH, THAT'S-- THAT'S WHAT HE
SAID.
AND, YOU KNOW, THERE'S AN
ARGUMENT THAT HE MADE WHICH WAS
ALONG THE LINES OF, LOOK, TAXES
ARE SOMETHING REPUBLICANS ARE ON
THE SAME PAGE ON.
EVERYBODY IS GOING TO WANT LOWER
TAXES.
IT'S A VISCERAL THING FOR
REPUBLICANS.
I THINK THE CHALLENGE HERE IS
THAT THE HEALTH CARE DEBACLE HAS
REMINDED EVERYBODY THAT THE
DETAILS DO MATTER, RIGHT?
BECAUSE REPUBLICANS FOR YEARS
TOOK VOTE AFTER VOTE ON
REPEALING OBAMACARE.
IT WAS SOMETHING EVERYBODY SAID
THEY WANTED TO DO, JUST THE SAME
AS ALL REPUBLICANS SAY WE WANT
TO LOWER TAXES, WE WANT TO LOWER
THE CORPORATE TAX RATE, TO MAKE
INVESTMENT AND U.S. BUSINESSES
MORE COMPETITIVE.
THE PROBLEM IS GOING TO BE THE
SAME.
THE DETAILS MATTER.
AND WE DON'T HAVE A LOT OF
DETAILS YET FROM THE
ADMINISTRATION.
SO, YOU KNOW, THE BALL IS KIND
OF ON THE TEE FOR THEM HERE TO
SWING AWAY AND PROPOSE
SOMETHING, BUT WE DON'T YET
REALLY KNOW EXACTLY WHAT THEY
WANT.
AND ONCE YOU PUT THOSE DETAILS
OUT THERE, YOU GIVE PEOPLE, YOU
KNOW, A TARGET TO START SHOOTING
AT.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
PROPOSALS WE'VE HEARD REPEATEDLY
FROM REPUBLICANS IS TO LOWER THE
CORPORATE TAX RATE FROM, SAY,
35% TO 20%.
BUT THAT COMES WITH ITS OWN
CONSEQUENCES.
>> RIGHT.
YOU LOSE A LOT OF REVENUE.
AND REPUBLICANS ARE TALKING
ABOUT DOING THIS USING THE SAME
KIND OF PROCEDURAL VEHICLE
LEGISLATIVELY THAT WOULD ALLOW
THEM TO BYPASS THE 60-VOTE
THRESHOLD IN THE SENATE SO THAT
THEY CAN DO THIS ON A PARTY LINE
VOTE.
BUT THAT PROCEDURAL HURDLE
CARRIES ITS OWN KIND OF
COMPLICATED SET OF RULES,
INCLUDING YOU CAN'T ADD TO
DEFICITS BEYOND TEN YEARS.
>> Sreenivasan: DOES IT GET
HARDER TO DO THIS AFTER HEALTH
CARE?
>> WELL, SPEAKER RYAN SAID THAT
ON FRIDAY.
HE SAID THAT THIS DOES GET
HARDER BECAUSE THERE WERE
CERTAIN TAXES IN OBAMACARE THAT
THEY WERE GOING TO REPEAL.
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO REPEAL
THOSE NOW.
I THINK IT ADDS TO THE URGENCY
HERE.
THERE WILL BE A GREATER IMPETUS
BECAUSE REPUBLICANS ARE GOING TO
WANT TO SHOW THEY CAN GET
SOMETHING DONE.
PRESIDENT TRUMP IS GOING TO WANT
TO HAVE BILL TO SIGN.
I THINK THE OTHER QUESTION IS--
YOU WERE TALKING ABOUT TAX
REFORM.
THERE IS A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
TAX REFORM AND TAX CUTS.
AND YOU HEAR THE PRESIDENT A LOT
SAYING HE JUST WANTS TO CUT THE
HECK OUT OF TAXES.
HE WANTS A BIG TAX CUT.
THAT IS DIFFERENT.
SO IT COULD BE THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION DECIDES, LOOK,
WE'RE JUST GOING TO TRY TO CUT
TAXES HERE.
WE'LL DEAL WITH THE DEFICITS
LATER.
YOU KNOW, WE'LL PROPOSE MAYBE
GROWTH ESTIMATES THAT SHOW THAT
THE DEFICITS WON'T MATTER AS
MUCH BECAUSE WE'RE GOING TO GROW
THE ECONOMY MORE.
BUT THAT'S ANOTHER AREA WHERE
YOU'RE NOT QUITE SURE YET IF
REPUBLICANS ARE ALL ON THE SAME
PAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: NICK TIMIRAOS
OF THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
JOINING US FROM D.C.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: U.S.-BACKED
IRAQI TROOPS HAVE TEMPORARILY
HALTED THEIR MONTHS LONG ATTEMPT
TO RETAKE MOSUL FROM ISIS
MILITANTS FOLLOWING REPORTS
THEIR ATTACKS HAVE CAUSED HEAVY
CIVILIAN CASUALTIES.
THE U.S.-LED COALITION IS
INVESTIGATING REPORTS THAT TWO
RECENT AIR STRIKES ON WEST MOSUL
KILLED MORE THAN 100 CIVILIANS
AND INJURED MANY MORE IN RECENT
DAYS.
ASSOCIATED PRESS JOURNALISTS
REPORT SEEING AT LEAST 50 BODIES
PULLED FROM WRECKED BUILDINGS.
THE TOP UNITED NATIONS
HUMANITARIAN OFFICIAL IN IRAQ
SAID TODAY SHE WAS "STUNNED BY
THIS TERRIBLE LOSS OF LIFE."
UP TO 600,000 CIVILIANS ARE
BELIEVED TRAPPED IN WEST MOSUL
AS THE FIGHTING INTENSIFIES.
TODAY MARKS THE 60th ANNIVERSARY
OF ONE OF THE FOUNDING TREATIES
OF THE EUROPEAN UNION.
AND TO MARK THAT OCCASION, THE
LEADERS OF THE E.U.'S 27
REMAINING MEMBER STATES MET IN
ROME IN THE HOPES OF SHORING UP
UNITY IN THE FACE OF RISING
NATIONALISM AND THE IMPENDING
EXIT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM FROM
THE UNION.
THE LEADERS SIGNED A DECLARATION
REAFFIRMING THEIR UNITY AND
ALLOWING MEMBER NATIONS MORE
FREEDOM IN DETERMINING THEIR OWN
POLICIES AND ALLIANCES.
DURING THE SUMMIT, EUROPEAN
COUNCIL PRESIDENT DONALD TUSK
WARNED AGAINST FURTHER
FRACTURING OF THE UNION.
>> EUROPE, AS A POLITICAL
ENTITY, WILL EITHER BE UNITED OR
WILL NOT BE AT ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: OUTSIDE THE
SUMMIT, THOUSANDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS GATHERED, SOME TO
EXPRESS THEIR SUPPORT FOR THE
EUROPEAN UNION AND SOME TO VOICE
THEIR OPPOSITION.
DEMONSTRATORS ALSO TURNED OUT IN
LONDON TODAY TO SHOW THEIR
SUPPORT FOR THE EUROPEAN UNION.
ABOUT 50,000 PEOPLE MARCHED
THROUGH CENTRAL LONDON TO
PROTEST BREXIT, BRITAIN'S
IMPENDING EXIT FROM THE E.U.
ORGANIZERS OF THE PROTEST
CONSIDERED DELAYING THE MARCH
BECAUSE OF WEDNESDAY'S TERRORIST
ATTACK BUT EVENTUALLY DECIDED TO
GO AHEAD, SAYING, "WE WILL NOT
BE INTIMIDATED."
CHILDREN IN 29 CALIFORNIA
NEIGHBORHOODS HAVE BEEN EXPOSED
TO LEVELS OF LEAD HIGHER THAN
THOSE IN FLINT, MICHIGAN.
READ MORE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
THE COUNTRY OF SOUTH SUDAN
GAINED ITS INDEPENDENCE FROM
SUDAN IN 2011.
BUT TWO YEARS LATER, THIS NEW
NATION OF MORE THAN 12 MILLION
PEOPLE BECAME EMBROILED IN A
CIVIL WAR.
THE CONFLICT HAS LED TO A MAN-
MADE FAMINE, ACCUSATIONS OF MASS
RAPE AND ETHNIC CLEANSING, AND
A MASSIVE REFUGEE CRISIS.
TODAY, SOUTH SUDANESE REFUGEES
ARE FLOODING INTO ITS CLOSEST
NEIGHBORS, SUDAN AND UGANDA; AND
ALSO INTO THE CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC, THE DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, ETHIOPIA
AND KENYA.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT SIMONA FOLTYN
REPORTS FROM SOUTH SUDAN ON THE
GROWING HUMANITARIAN CRISIS.
>> Reporter: IN JUBA, THE
CAPITAL OF SOUTH SUDAN, THIS
UNITED NATIONS CAMP WAS SUPPOSED
TO BE TEMPORARY.
BUT AFTER MORE THAN THREE YEARS
OF A BRUTAL CIVIL WAR, PEOPLE
CONTINUE TO FLOCK HERE FOR
SAFETY.
TODAY, MORE THAN THREE MILLION
PEOPLE, ALMOST ONE-THIRD OF
SOUTH SUDAN'S POPULATION, HAVE
BEEN FORCED FROM THEIR HOMES.
HALF OF THEM HAVE FLED TO
NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES LIKE
UGANDA.
THE REST ARE INTERNALLY
DISPLACED, LIKE JOHN JANOUB.
HE ARRIVED HERE WITH HIS WIFE
AND DAUGHTER LAST YEAR WHEN
FIGHTING SPREAD TO THEIR
HOMETOWN CALLED YEI IN THE
SOUTHERN PART OF THE COUNTRY IN
A REGION CALLED EQUATORIA.
>> Reporter: THE CIVIL WAR
ORIGINATED IN A POWER STRUGGLE
OVER THE COUNTRY'S TOP POST
BETWEEN SOUTH SUDAN'S FIRST
PRESIDENT, SALVA KIIR, AND HIS
FORMER FIRST VICE PRESIDENT,
RIEK MACHAR.
AS BOTH MEN MOBILIZED SUPPORT
ALONG ETHNIC LINES, THE CONFLICT
PITTED KIIR'S TRIBE, THE DINKA,
AGAINST MACHAR'S, THE NUER,
TURNING IT INTO A BROADER
STRUGGLE OVER LAND AND
RESOURCES, INCLUDING OIL.
THE TWO LEADERS SIGNED A PEACE
DEAL IN 2015, BUT IT COLLAPSED
NINE MONTHS AGO WHEN FIGHTING
RESUMED IN JUBA.
MACHAR FLED AND IS NOW LIVING IN
EXILE IN SOUTH AFRICA.
WHEN PRESIDENT KIIR'S GOVERNMENT
TROOPS REACHED YEI, JANOUB
THOUGHT HIS FAMILY WOULD BE
SPARED.
LIKE MOST OF HIS TRIBE, THEY HAD
REMAINED NEUTRAL.
BUT TO HIS HORROR, JANOUB SAW
GOVERNMENT TROOPS SET FIRE TO
HIS HOME.
>> Reporter: JANOUB SAYS SEVEN
MEMBERS OF HIS FAMILY AND
SEVERAL NEIGHBORS DIED IN THE
FIRE, AND THEN THE SOLDIERS WENT
AFTER HIM.
>> Reporter: JANOUB MANAGED TO
ESCAPE WITH THE HELP OF FRIENDS.
FOR THREE WEEKS, THEY WALKED
THROUGH THE WILDERNESS UNTIL
THEY REACHED THIS CAMP.
AND THE PEOPLE WHO KILLED YOUR
FAMILY, WERE THEY SOLDIERS?
>> Reporter: THEY WERE WEARING
UNIFORMS?
>> Reporter: WHY WOULD THEY DO
THAT?
>> Reporter: MOST OF THE
GOVERNMENT SOLDIERS ARE DINKA,
WHICH HAS FUELED PERCEPTIONS OF
ETHNIC CLEANSING.
>> Reporter: WHEN I CAUGHT UP
WITH A SPOKESMAN FOR THE
GOVERNMENT TROOPS, KNOWN AS THE
SUDAN PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY,
OR S.P.L.A., HE DENIED THAT
ABUSES ARE HAPPENING IN A
SYSTEMATIC WAY.
>> Reporter: DESPITE THE RECENT
SURGE IN VIOLENCE, THE
GOVERNMENT SAYS THAT IT'S
COMMITTED TO THE PEACE DEAL, AND
IT HAS BEEN URGING PEOPLE TO
LEAVE THIS CAMP.
BUT ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS HAVE
BEEN A HALLMARK OF THIS
CONFLICT, AND WITH ETHNIC STRIFE
ON THE RISE, THERE'S SIMPLY NO
CONFIDENCE THAT IT'S SAFE TO GO
OUTSIDE.
THE UNITED NATIONS IS WARNING
THE SURGE IN VIOLENCE AND ETHNIC
TARGETING OF CIVILIANS COULD
SPIRAL INTO A GENOCIDE.
DAVID SHEARER LEADS THE U.N.
PEACEKEEPING MISSION HERE.
>> WE CERTAINLY HAVE SEEN
COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE HAD TO
EITHER FLEE FROM WHERE THEY ARE
LIVING, HOUSES BURNED, WOMEN
RAPED, PEOPLE KILLED IN LARGE
NUMBERS.
>> Reporter: EARLIER THIS MONTH,
THE U.N. REPORT OF THE
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS IN
SOUTH SUDAN FOUND MOST OF THE
ATROCITIES HAVE BEEN COMMITTED
BY GOVERNMENT SOLDIERS AGAINST
CIVILIANS THOUGHT TO BE
SUPPORTING REBEL FORCES.
THE U.N.'S 12,000 PEACEKEEPERS
ARE SUPPOSED TO PREVENT SUCH
ATROCITIES, BUT MOST OF THEM
PROTECT THE U.N. CAMPS.
AND SHEARER SAYS GOVERNMENT
TROOPS OFTEN BLOCK ACCESS
ELSEWHERE.
>> THE GOVERNMENT DOESN'T WANT
US TO GO INTO PARTICULAR AREAS
BECAUSE THERE ARE MILITARY
OPERATIONS GOING ON, AND THEY
BELIEVE THAT WE WILL GET IN THE
WAY OF THEIR MILITARY
OBJECTIVES.
IT'S NOT A SYSTEMATIC DENIAL OF
US GOING INTO OPPOSITION AREAS;
IT'S MORE OF US GETTING IN THE
WAY AND SEEING WHAT'S HAPPENING
ON THE GROUND WITH REGARD TO
MILITARY OPERATIONS THAT ARE
ONGOING.
>> Reporter: FLYING TWO HOURS
NORTH OF JUBA TO REBEL-HELD
AREAS, I PASSED OVER THE TOWN OF
WAU SHILLUK, WHICH GOVERNMENT
FORCES ATTACKED IN FEBRUARY.
IT LOOKS LIKE PARTS OF THE TOWN
WERE BURNED TO THE GROUND.
I LANDED IN THE NEARBY TOWN OF
KODOK ON THE WEST BANK OF THE
NILE RIVER.
AS THE CULTURAL AND POLITICAL
CAPITAL OF THE SHILLUK TRIBE,
THIS USED TO BE A VIBRANT TOWN,
BUT MUCH OF THE POPULATION HAS
FLED.
GOVERNMENT FORCES ARE STATIONED
JUST ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
RIVER NILE, WHICH IS EFFECTIVELY
THE FRONT LINE.
OVER THE PAST WEEKS, THERE HAS
BEEN INTENSE FIGHTING JUST AN
HOUR SOUTH OF HERE, AND MANY
FEAR THAT THE TOWN OF KODOK
COULD BE HIT NEXT.
THE SOUTH SUDANESE GOVERNMENT
BLAMES THE REBELS FOR PROVOKING
THE FIGHTING IN THIS REGION.
REBEL COMMANDER MAJOR GENERAL
PETER OTAR LAA SEES THE
SITUATION DIFFERENTLY.
>> (translated): IT WAS THE
GOVERNMENT ARMY THAT CAME AND
ATTACKED OUR POSITIONS AS WELL
AS THE CIVILIANS AT WAU SHILLUK.
>> Reporter: OTAR LAA SAYS REBEL
FORCES WILL CONTINUE FIGHTING
UNTIL OPPOSITION LEADER RIEK
MACHAR IS ALLOWED BACK INTO THE
COUNTRY.
>> (translated): THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY HAS THE
ABILITY TO MAKE PEACE EITHER BY
FORCE, THROUGH NEGOTIATIONS OR
ANY OTHER MEANS.
BUT IF THEY JUST SIT BACK LIKE
IN JULY WHEN DR. RIEK MACHAR WAS
PUSHED OUT, THEN WE DON'T EXPECT
PEACE TO COME.
>> Reporter: TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE FLED THE MOST RECENT
FIGHTING IN WAU SHILLUK BY
WALKING FOR DAYS TO ESCAPE THE
FRONT LINES.
THEY CARRIED WHATEVER THEY COULD
GRAB WHEN THEIR VILLAGES CAME
UNDER ATTACK.
MOST HAVE TAKEN REFUGE IN THIS
FOREST.
THIS WOMAN COLLAPSED.
HER MOTHER SAID SHE HADN'T EATEN
FOR THREE DAYS.
EVERYONE HERE IS VISIBLY
EXHAUSTED, HAVING SLEPT FOR
WEEKS OUT IN THE OPEN.
ALISA PADAW IS ALSO COPING WITH
THE LOSS OF HER YOUNGEST SON,
KILLED WHEN THE GOVERNMENT
SHELLED WAU SHILLUK LAST MONTH.
HE WAS ONLY 12 YEARS OLD.
SHE ALSO HAS TWO TEENAGE SONS
WHO ARE MISSING.
>> (translated): WHEN THE
SHELLING HIT, THE HOT SOIL FELL
ON ME AND BURNED ME HERE ON MY
CHEST.
THEN, IMMEDIATELY, OUR HOUSE
STARTED BURNING.
>> Reporter: SINCE LEAVING WAU
SHILLUK, PADAW AND HER FAMILY
HAVE SURVIVED MOSTLY BY EATING
LEAVES.
THEY LEFT ALL THEIR HARVEST
BEHIND WHEN THEY FLED FOR THEIR
LIVES.
>> (translated): WE CAME WITH
EMPTY HANDS.
WE LEFT ALL OUR THINGS THERE.
WHEN WE GO TO SLEEP, WE JUST
PRAY TO GOD THAT HE WILL ASSIST.
WHEN THE DAY COMES, WE LOOK FOR
THE LEAVES AND THE FRUITS FROM
THE TREES.
>> Reporter: THE U.N. SAYS
100,000 PEOPLE ARE AT IMMEDIATE
RISK OF STARVING TO DEATH DUE TO
A MANMADE FAMINE, THE CIVIL WAR
HAVING PREVENTED FARMERS FROM
PLANTING AND HARVESTING FOR
THREE YEARS.
AID FROM THE U.N.'S WORLD FOOD
PROGRAM HAS STARTED TRICKLING
IN, BUT THE U.N. SAYS THE
GOVERNMENT HAS PREVENTED ITS
DELIVERY TO CIVILIANS IN REBEL-
CONTROLLED AREAS.
WHILE THEY WAIT FOR AID, PADAW
AND HER FELLOW VILLAGERS FIND
WAYS TO KEEP GOING.
DURING THE ATTACK, HER NEIGHBOR,
YOUSSUF, RAN AND GRABBED ONE
THING HE THOUGHT NECESSARY TO
SURVIVE.
>> (translated): I'M MAKING
THIS FISHING NET, SO WHEN THE
RAINY SEASONS COMES, I CAN FISH
HERE.
THAT WAY, I CAN GET SOMETHING TO
EAT FOR MYSELF AND EVEN THESE
CHILDREN HERE.
>> Reporter: BUT IT WILL BE
WEEKS UNTIL THE RAINS COME.
IN AN ATTEMPT TO FEED
THEMSELVES, THE DISPLACED TRY TO
SELL THEIR OTHER BELONGINGS.
EVEN THAT WOULD EARN THEM ENOUGH
TO BUY ONLY A FEW DAYS' WORTH OF
FOOD.
THE U.N. IS NOW WARNING THAT
5.5 MILLION PEOPLE-- HALF THE
POPULATION OF SOUTH SUDAN-- ARE
AT RISK OF SEVERE FOOD
INSECURITY THIS YEAR.
>>THIS IS PBS NRWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: MORE DETAILS ARE
EMERGING ABOUT THE HOMEGROWN
TERRORIST WHO KILLED FOUR PEOPLE
NEAR THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT THIS
WEEK.
SAUDI OFFICIALS HAVE CONFIRMED
THAT YEARS BEFORE THE ATTACK, HE
TAUGHT ENGLISH IN SAUDI ARABIA
ON TWO DIFFERENT OCCASIONS
BETWEEN 2005 AND 2009.
THE BRITISH-BORN CONVERT TO
ISLAM ALSO VISITED SAUDI ARABIA
FOR ALMOST A WEEK TWO YEARS AGO.
THEY SAID 52-YEAR-OLD KHALID
MASOOD, WHO WAS SHOT AND KILLED
BY POLICE, HAD NO CRIMINAL
RECORD WHILE IN SAUDI ARABIA.
THE ISLAMIC STATE CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ATTACK,
SAYING MASOOD WAS AN ISIS
SOLDIER.
A U.S. AND BRITISH BAN ON LARGE
ELECTRONIC DEVICES ON FLIGHTS
ORIGINATING FROM SEVERAL
PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM COUNTRIES
TOOK EFFECT TODAY.
THE U.S. BAN COVERS EIGHT
COUNTRIES, INCLUDING TURKEY,
QATAR AND THE UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES.
HOMELAND AND TRANSPORTATION
SECURITY OFFICIALS ORDERED THE
BAN AFTER U.S. AND BRITISH
INTELLIGENCE NOTED WHAT THEY
SAID WAS AN INCREASED TERRORIST
RISK TO COMMERCIAL AIRPLANES.
ELECTRONIC DEVICES LARGER THAT A
MOBILE PHONE MUST BE PLACED IN
CHECKED BAGGAGE ON FLIGHTS BOUND
FOR THE UNITED STATES AND THE
U.K. FROM THE AFFECTED
COUNTRIES.
FRUSTRATIONS ARE HIGH AT ATATURK
AIRPORT IN ISTANBUL, WHERE SOME
TURKS QUESTIONED IF THE BAN IS
MEANT TO UNDERMINE THE TURKISH
AIRLINE INDUSTRY.
FORMER PENN STATE PRESIDENT
GRAHAM SPANIER HAS BEEN
CONVICTED OF COVERING UP CHILD
ABUSE ALLEGATIONS FROM 16 YEARS
AGO.
YESTERDAY, A JURY FOUND SPANIER
GUILTY OF ONE COUNT OF CHILD
ENDANGERMENT OVER HIS HANDLING
OF ACCUSATIONS AGAINST JERRY
SANDUSKY, THE FORMER PENN STATE
ASSISTANT FOOTBALL COACH WHO WAS
CONVICTED OF CHILD MOLESTATION
IN 2012 AND IS SERVING A 30-TO-
60-YEAR PRISON TERM.
A 2001 EMAIL FROM SPANIER TO
UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATORS SHOWED
THAT HE HAD APPROVED A PLAN TO
HANDLE THE CASE INTERNALLY
WITHOUT ALERTING STATE OFFICIALS
OF THE ABUSE.
SPANIER NOW FACES UP TO FIVE
YEARS IN PRISON.
HIS LAWYER HAS SAID THAT THEY
WILL APPEAL THE CASE.
>> Sreenivasan: ON TOMORROW'S
PROGRAM, HOW IRELAND IS
PREPARING FOR THE FINANCIAL
FALLOUT FROM BREXIT.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.